[Music]
Navigating high-risk environments when
you can't see what's ahead is no mean
feat. But it's the kind of uncertainty
Donald Trump's trade actions have forced
on China's factory workers.
>> President Trump ramping up trade
tensions again.
>> The word tariff music to my ears.
>> So we're in the realm of just endless
tit.
>> This just kind of indicates how much of
a moving target this has really become.
At stake is hundreds of billions of
dollars in bilateral trade and access to
the world's single largest consumer
market backed by American spending
power.
>> This trade war basically leaves no one
untouched. Whether that's investors,
business people or officials in any
country,
>> it just seems like every manufacturer in
China realizes that they need to have
strategies in case things get worse.
>> Two things are becoming clear, though.
one that finding a replacement for the
mighty US consumer is as essential as it
is difficult and two that despite all
the tariff chaos, Chinese manufacturers
aren't rushing to shift production into
the US. Americans don't want to make
spatulas. They want to eat hamburgers.
And I don't mean that in a negative way.
I want to eat hamburgers, too. But I'm
here in China making the spatulas to do
it. Americans don't want these jobs. And
to think that manufacturing would go
back to the United States is a farce.
>> Chinese manufacturers have had to get
used to living with uncertainty.
>> They're not looking at their strategy 5
10 years down the line. They're looking
to keep their factories open for the
next few months.
>> And that's costing money and clients.
Typically, we'll do about 150 to 160
million in revenue. This year, we're
down about 20%. Our customers are
essentially on pause.
Even exporters of incense destined for
yoga studios, people you'd expect to be
pretty zen, are ftting over demand.
You probably know why
>> we really need to change the way trade
works around the world.
>> We basically saw in April that the US
and China traded these tit fortat tariff
hikes which raised tariffs up to 145%
for Chinese goods going to the US and
125% for US goods coming to China. In
midMay, we saw those tariffs reduce.
>> Still, Trump continues to make threats,
including against countries that help
China sidestep tariffs.
Trade between the two nations has ridden
steadily for the last 25 years.
>> We're looking at basically $600 billion
worth of goods traded between the two
nations last year.
>> And with that has come a ballooning
trade deficit. In 2024, the US imported
nearly $439 billion US worth of goods
from China. But US exports to China
totaled little more than 143 billion.
That's about a $295
billion difference or trade deficit.
>> One country actually said to me, I I was
amazed that we were able to get away
with it for this long.
While the US administration argues
tariffs are the best way to address
trade imbalances,
>> Chinese manufacturers, they don't
understand why the US is doing this. For
a lot of Chinese exporters, it's going
to be a lot more costly, a lot more
difficult to sell to the US market going
forward.
>> The concern is that companies that will
no longer have access to their biggest
export market will then need to cut
prices, let go of people. there will be
lower wages and you know that's going to
damper consumer sentiment. Consumer
confidence in China is already at
historic lows because of this prolonged
property crisis where a lot of wealth is
tied up.
>> Despite all the uncertainty, the latest
data shows China's economy appears to
have held up despite a slump in trade
with the US. China's gross domestic
product expanded by a better thanex
expected 5.2% 2% during the second
quarter of the year. While exports to
the US fell 24% in the second quarter,
China's overall exports rose over 6%
during the same period. But the country
is facing persistent deflation, meaning
companies are earning less money and
making them more reluctant to invest and
higher. Although China has signaled this
intention to shift to a more
consumer-driven economy, it still really
depends on its manufacturing sector to
be able to meet its growth targets.
>> As uncertainty around Trump's tariff
plans persist, manufacturers, workers,
and their families are stuck in limbo
and bracing for the worst.
Although Chinese exports to the US
account for something like 3% of GDP,
once you take into the secondary effect,
the loss of jobs, lower wages,
potentially price cuts to get rid of
inventory, then we're looking at a much
worse situation and potentially a
deflationary spiral.
>> And so with Trump's trade assault
whipsaring relations between the world's
biggest economies, China's manufacturers
are grappling for options.
For one thing, US businesses and
distributors who buy goods manufactured
in China need time to plan orders. At
Vong Enterprises, a manufacturer in
GuangDong, Jacob Rothman says this
hasn't been possible.
[Music]
>> There are buying cycles and they only
happen once a year. and shipping for
those categories, no matter what it is,
are regimented to those shipping cycles.
>> On again, offagain US policy has been
confusing, too. Trump's 90-day delay
following his so-called liberation day
tariffs didn't help companies like
Jacobs
was saying how his staff let out a big
cheer uh when they heard about the
reduction. Later that evening, uh his US
customers uh called him and said they
were still upset. They didn't know where
to place their orders because we're too
late for the previous season that they
missed product for and too early for the
next season. So where do they place
their orders?
>> About 700 miles to the west outside the
city of Kunming, Jonathan Wang runs
Shanty Veil, an incense brand.
The family business has been producing
their products by hand for more than a
decade. They have their own workshop,
their own farm. And over the last year
or so, Jonathan has decided to export to
the US.
He was also hit by Trump's closure of
the dimminimous tariff loophole, a Latin
term meaning too small to matter. It let
small businesses ship low-v valueue
packages duty-free.
Fore.
In an effort to sidestep the evolving
tariffs, many companies in mainland
China have adopted a so-called China
plus one model. India and Southeast Asia
have benefited. In particular,
>> our first factory outside of China was
in Cambodia and it was during President
Trump's first term and it was really to
test if we could project our
manufacturing beyond China. Since 70% of
our goods go to the United States, we
did have to, of course, make cuts to our
manufacturing staff.
>> We've seen a pretty big exodus to
Southeast Asia to take advantage of
those lower labor costs, but also for
the proximity to Chinese raw materials.
>> We have no choice. So even within this
year our Cambodian factory doubled in
size. So did our factory outside of
Delhi and our factory outside of Mumbai
is adding new manufacturing space. Now
>> we've already seen exporters look to
emerging markets for other developed
markets for those goods that they're no
longer able to sell to the US.
>> 30% of our volume is going to Europe.
Presumably we could say well let's stop
US business, right? Let's focus on
Europe. But then you have every single
company and manufacturing firm focusing
on a smaller market. Competition becomes
even more fierce for Europe.
It's very hard to replace the US
consumer. It's the biggest market and
the American consumers are very open to
new ideas and trying new trends.
>> There's just no way that China can fill
that volume of exports uh quickly,
whether it's emerging markets or uh
developed countries. But in the long
term, they're hoping that these emerging
markets will provide a way out.
>> There's no quick replacement for the US
market. The spending power of the US
consumer is so strong, even with
tariffs, Chinese companies are not
wholly scared off. Instead, it's about
managing an uncertain relationship and
planning for the worst. So the
conversations in Beijing, whether it's
among officials, business people,
academics, it's not really about how to
rebuild the relationship with the US.
It's about managing the decoupling and
how to do it in the least painful way
possible.
[Music]